Excerpt from Pride and Prejudice, Chapter 34:

“In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love you.”

Elizabeth was too much astonished to say a word. Her eyes were fixed on him, and she wondered why he was looking so serious, so passionate. Mr. Darcy’s face was very pale, and his hands were clenched into fists. There was something in the way he spoke that made her feel his sincerity, but also his discomfort. She had not expected such a direct confession, nor had she ever imagined that someone so proud would make himself vulnerable like this.

“I believe I have made my feelings quite clear,” Darcy continued. “You, Miss Bennet, are the one woman I have ever admired in this way, and I cannot imagine a life without you. I know I have shown myself to be disagreeable at times, but I have never meant to cause you harm. It is just that the differences in our stations in life have made it difficult for me to express my feelings as I ought.”

Elizabeth remained silent for a long moment, her thoughts in a whirlwind. Mr. Darcy, the proud, aloof gentleman who had looked down on her family, who had insulted her sister, was now confessing his love. It was a shocking turn of events, and she did not know how to respond.

“I am sorry if I have caused you distress,” Darcy said, his voice softening. “But I cannot help my feelings, and I would rather speak them now than remain silent any longer.”

Elizabeth, still in shock, found her voice at last. “Mr. Darcy,” she said, her tone measured, “I do not know what to say. You have surprised me, and I do not believe I can accept your offer.”

Darcy’s face fell, and he looked at her with a mixture of disbelief and hope. “You must not refuse me, Miss Bennet. I am offering you my heart, and I am asking for nothing in return except your love.”

“But you have not treated me with respect,” Elizabeth said, her voice gaining strength. “You have judged my family unfairly, and you have spoken of my sister with cruel words. How can I accept such an offer from someone who has shown me such little regard?”

“I understand your objections, and I will admit my faults,” Darcy said, his voice becoming more earnest. “But my feelings for you are true. I cannot deny them. If you could see past my mistakes, you would understand that my intentions are genuine.”

Elizabeth shook her head, her emotions in turmoil. “I cannot accept you, Mr. Darcy. Not when you have shown so little regard for my family and for me.”

Darcy looked at her, his eyes searching hers. “I see now that I have been wrong. But if you would give me the chance, I would prove myself worthy of your love.”

Elizabeth hesitated for a moment, then spoke again. “I do not know what the future holds, Mr. Darcy, but I cannot marry someone who has treated me with such disdain.”

Darcy’s face grew pale again, and he turned away, as if in defeat. But before he could leave, Elizabeth added, “I will not marry you, but I will remember what you have said. And perhaps one day, we can meet as equals.”

Darcy looked back at her, his eyes full of emotion. “Perhaps, Miss Bennet. Perhaps one day we will.”
